# P08 - Functional Analysis and Profiling of Microbial Communities Within Subtypes


## Purpose:
To evaluate the predicted functional potential of the gastric microbiome between intestinal and diffuse subtypes and determine the extent to which biological sex modifies these functional pathways.

## Material: 
* 16S rRNA gene sequencing dataset (V4 region) from Wang et al. (2020).
  * Filtered feature table (45 samples: 30 diffuse, 15 intestinal).
* The MetaCyc metabolic pathway database.
* The following R packages: phyloseq, tidyverse, ANCOMBC (v2.6.0), ggplot2, and ggrepel.

## Method:
Using PICRUSt2, we will first find the metagenomic functional genes from the 16S rRNA ASVs (this is done on the terminal). We then have to map the predicted genes to the MetaCyc database to identify specific metabolic pathways. Once they are mapped, we will perform differential abundance analysis between intestinal and diffuse subtypes. This will be done using R, and specifically, ANCOM-BC2, with the Lauren subtype set as the fixed effect. We then have to perform this differential abundance analysis again, this time focusing on the diffuse subtype group and looking for differences between males and females. TO do this, we will have to create a new ANCOM-BC2 model, this time setting the biological sex as the fixed effect. Finally, we will generate volcano plots of both these findings, to showcase the distribution of significantly enriched pathways across both Lauren subtypes, and then across gender within the diffuse subtype (so 2 figures in total).

## Code: 
All necessary scripts and input files can be found in our R_Project directory as follows: [Aim 3 folder](../R_Project/Aim3/)

## Output Files:
  * [Aim3_Volcano_Plot.png](../R_Project/Aim3/Figures/Aim3_Volcano_Plot.png)
  * [Aim3_Gender_Volcano_Plot.png](../R_Project/Aim3/Figures/Aim3_Gender_Volcano_Plot.png)

Also created two heatmaps on the side:
  * [Aim3_Functional_Heatmap.png](../R_Project/Aim3/Figures/Aim3_Functional_Heatmap.png)
  * [Aim3_Functional_Gender_Heatmap.png](../R_Project/Aim3/Figures/Aim3_Functional_Gender_Heatmap.png)
   
## Results: 
1. The diffuse subtype showed significantly higher overall functional enrichment compared to the intestinal subtype. Some noteworthy pathways that were the most significantly enriched in the diffuse subtype include Lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis pathways (such as Lipid IVA biosynthesis, CMP-KDO biosynthesis, and KDO transfer to Lipid IVA).

2. Focusing specifically on the diffuse subtype, the male patients showed a significant increase in functional enrichment and overall abundance of predicted metabolic pathways compared to the females. The most enriched pathway within the male group compared to the females is CMP-pseudaminate biosynthesis.

## Discussion:
The overall enrichment and abundance of lipopolysaccharide-related pathways within the diffuse subtype suggest the possibility that a pro-inflammatory environment may contribute to the aggressive composition of these tumours. Furthermore, the significant enrichment of CMP-pseudaminate biosynthesis within the male diffuse group aligns with how we previously found a high abundance of *Heliobacter* within this group. Previous research suggests that pseudaminic acid is essential for the flagellin glycosylation, and overall motility and virulence of *Helicobacter pylori*, which suggests that the *H. pylori* present within the male diffuse gastric environment may be more virulent and mobile, in turn, providing a link as to why there are differences in gastric cancer severity between patients of different biological sexes.

## Future direction:
* Determine whether these metabolic differences remain significant when the data is adjusted for other factors such as age, weight, etc.
